## Predicting progressions and clinical subtypes of Alzheimer’s disease using machine learning 
### Authors

Vipul Satone, Rachneet Kaur, Faraz Faghri, Roy H. Campbell


### ABSTRACT
Alzheimer’s disease is a degenerative brain disease which impairs person’s ability perform day to day activities. Research has shown AD to be a heterogeneous condition, having high variation in terms of the symptoms and disease progression rate. Treating Alzheimer's disease (AD) is especially challenging due to theses variations present in the disease progression stages.  The clinical symptoms of AD are identified by substantial diversity in terms of patients’ age, disease span, progression velocity and types of memory, cognitive and depression related features. Hence, the idea of personalized clinical care, with individualized risk, progression and prediction related patient advice in AD is narrow. This facilitates the yet unfulfilled need for an early prediction of the disease course to assist its treatment and therapy with the progression rate. 
Recent developments in machine learning techniques provide a huge potential not only to predict onset and progression of Alzheimer's disease but also to classify the disease into different subtypes. The advancement of these prediction models will thoroughly impact clinical test outline and improve the healthcare resource allocation. It will also lead to development of a personalized clinical care and counseling for patients with a cut down on AD treatment costs. The suggested work clusters patients in distinct progression groups of Alzheimer's disease and discusses an approach to predict the progression stage in an early baseline period through the implementation of machine learning techniques. By applying machine learning algorithms on the extensive clinical observations available at the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) dataset, we depict the progression space for the Alzheimer’s disease into low, moderate and high disease progressors. This work suggests that the clinically related symptoms summarizing the Alzheimer's Disease progression space correspond to memory and cognition. The proposed work concludes notably accurate prediction of disease progression after four years from the 12 months of  diagnosis data ( AUC under ROC of 0.90 ± 0.04 for Controls, 0.96 ± 0.03 for High risk, 0.88 ± 0.03 for Moderate Risk 0.84 ± 0.03 for Low risk ). We validate our model through five-fold cross-validation to obtain robust prediction of the progression subtypes. 

These machine learning techniques will assist the medical practitioners to classify different progression 	rates within patients and might also lead to an improvement in the detection of significant clinical outcomes that otherwise may be harder to notice. With an additional  information about the onset rate of AD at hand, doctors may alter their treatments to better suit the patients. The predictive tests discussed in the proposed work allow early detection and characterization of distinct disease subtypes based on clinical heterogeneity, which helps doctors subduing AD effects with a better stage information. This will lead to an improved clinical test outline and personalized clinical care for patients, with a significant downscaling of the treatment costs.

